#labels Featured
#How to use Hyphenator on your website

= Using Hyphenator on your website =
You can freely use Hyphenator on your website. Send me a notice about it, if you feel like.
This article explains what you will have to do and gives you some configuration hints.

== Step by Step ==
  #Prepare your HTML-documents by
    * Encoding it in UTF-8.
    * Setting the appropriate lang-attributes (e.g. `<html lang="en">`).
    * Adding `class="hyphenate"` to the elements whose text should be hyphenated (children do inherit this setting).
  # Include the script by adding the following code to your HTML-document:
{{{
<script src="http://hyphenator.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/Hyphenator.js" type="text/javascript">
</script>
}}} 
    You may also [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/list download it] and load it from your server. If you do that, you will also have to change the hardcoded basepath in the script (somewhere around line 28).
  # Invoke the script, when the page is loaded:
{{{
<script type="text/javascript">
    window.onload=function() {
        Hyphenator.hyphenateDocument();
    };
</script>
}}}
	Done.
	There are some settings you can change before invoking the script:
	To change the minimal length of words to be hyphenated (default=6, the lower the number the slower the script), use this:
{{{
Hyphenator.setMinWordLength(4);
}}}
	To change the hyphen character (defaults to &amp;shy;):
{{{
Hyphenator.setHyphenChar('|');
}}}
	Other settings are hardcoded in the script. Read it, and change them!

When the function `Hyphenator.hyphenateDocument()` is called, the script hyphenates all text of elements having the attribute `class="hyphenate"` — even the text of their child-elements.

== The Example ==
What could be better than a working example?
{{{
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN"
	"http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">
<html lang="en">
	<head>
		<title>hyph.js</title>
		<meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
		<style type="text/css">
			body {
				width:50%;
				margin-left:25%;
				margin-right:25%;
			}
			.text {
				text-align:justify;
			}
		</style>
		<script src="http://hyphenator.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/Hyphenator.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
		<script type="text/javascript">
			window.onload=function() {
				Hyphenator.setMinWordLength(4);
				//Hyphenator.setHyphenChar('·');
				Hyphenator.hyphenateDocument();
			}
		</script>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h1>Example of using Hyphenator.js</h1>
		<p class="hyphenate text" lang="de">Deutschsprachige Beispieltexte haben natürlicherweise längere Wortzusammensetzungen als englischsprachige. Aber auch <span lang="en">“hyphenation”</span> ist ein ziemlich langes Wort.</p>
		<p class="hyphenate text" lang="en">English words are shorter in the average then german words. <span lang="de">«Silbentrennungsalgorithmus»</span> for example is quite long.</p>
	</body>
</html>
}}}

= Using Hyphentor as a Bookmarklet =
If you want to hyphenate a foreign website (a website whose webmaster aren't you) you can "install" hyphenator as a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bookmarklet Bookmarklet] in your browser(s). Simply safe the following Javascript code as a bookmark. When you're on the site to be hyphenated you click on that bookmarklet to start hyphenating the page.

{{{
javascript:if(document.createElement){void(head=document.getElementsByTagName('head').item(0));void(script=document.createElement('script'));void(script.src='http://hyphenator.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/Hyphenator.js?bm=true');void(script.type='text/javascript');void(head.appendChild(script));}
}}}