#summary How to use Hyphenator on a website
#labels Phase-Deploy

= Download and Install =
== Using Hyphenator as a Bookmarklet ==
As a normal websurfer you'll have to create a [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bookmarklet bookmarklet] by saving the following line of code as a bookmark:

{{{
javascript:if(document.createElement){void(head=document.getElementsByTagName('head').item(0));void(script=document.createElement('script'));void(script.src='http://hyphenator.googlecode.com/svn/tags/Version%202.5.0/Hyphenator.js?bm=true');void(script.type='text/javascript');void(head.appendChild(script));}
}}}

When you're on the website to be hyphenated you click on that bookmarklet to start hyphenating the page.
If the pages language isn't set, you will have to edit it manually in a popping-up prompt.

== Using Hyphenator on your website ==
For a webdeveloper who wishes to hyphenate his website, things are slightly more complicated. You'll need basic knowledge about HTML and !JavaScript to do the following steps.

=== Step by Step ===
  # [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/list Download] an actual version of Hyphenator.js and copy it to your server (make sure to copy the folder called `patterns`, too).
  # Prepare your HTML-documents by
    * Encoding them in UTF-8 (not absolutely necessary, but highly recommended)
    * Setting the appropriate lang-attributes (e.g. `<html lang="en">`).
    * Adding `class="hyphenate"` to the elements whose text should be hyphenated (children do inherit this setting). Hyphenation can be stopped by adding `class="donthyphenate"`.
    * Validating (not absolutely necessary, but again highly recommended): http://validator.w3.org/
  # Include the script by adding the following code to your HTML-document:
{{{
<script src="http://yourdomain.com/path/Hyphenator.js" type="text/javascript">
</script>
}}} 
  # Invoke the script:
{{{
<script type="text/javascript">
	    Hyphenator.run();
</script>
}}}
	Done.
	There are many interesting and useful settings you can change before you invoke the script. See [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/wiki/en_PublicAPI Documentation] for more details.

=== Example ===
What could be better than a [http://hyphenator.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/WorkingExample.html working example]?
{{{
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 4.01//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/strict.dtd">
<html lang="en">
    <head>
        <title>Hyphenator.js</title>
        <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
        <style type="text/css">
            body {
                width:30%;
                margin-left:35%;
                margin-right:35%;
            }
            .text {
                text-align:justify;
            }
        </style>
        <script src="Hyphenator.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
        <script type="text/javascript">
        	Hyphenator.config({
        		displaytogglebox : true,
        		minwordlength : 4
        	});
        	Hyphenator.run();
        </script>
    </head>
    <body>
        <h1>Example of using Hyphenator.js</h1>
        <h2>Deutsch</h2>
        <p class="hyphenate text" lang="de">Deutschsprachige Beispieltexte haben natürlicherweise längere Wortzusammensetzungen als englischsprachige. Aber auch <span lang="en">“hyphenation”</span> ist ein ziemlich langes Kompositum.</p>
        <p class="hyphenate text" lang="de">Verändern Sie die Fenstergrösse um den Effekt der Silbentrennung zu sehen.</p>
        <h2>English</h2>
        <p class="hyphenate text" lang="en">English words are shorter in the average then german words. <span lang="de">«Silbentrennungsalgorithmus»</span> for example is quite long.</p>
        <p class="hyphenate text" lang="en">Resize the window to see hyphenation in effect.</p>
        <h2>Links</h2>
        <p class="hyphenate text" lang="en">Not only words but also links like <a href="http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/">http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/</a> are processed. But in a special manner (using zero width space).</p>
    </body>
</html>
}}}

== Legal ==
Hyphenator.js and its documentation are published under the [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html GPL v3]:
{{{
//  Hyphenator 2.X.Y - client side hyphenation for webbrowsers
//  Copyright (C) 2009  Mathias Nater, Zürich (mathias at mnn dot ch)
//  Project and Source hosted on http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/
// 
//  This JavaScript code is free software: you can redistribute
//  it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser
//  General Public License (GNU LGPL) as published by the Free Software
//  Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option)
//  any later version.  The code is distributed WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY;
//  without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
//  FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU GPL for more details.
//
//  As additional permission under GNU GPL version 3 section 7, you
//  may distribute non-source (e.g., minimized or compacted) forms of
//  that code without the copy of the GNU GPL normally required by
//  section 4, provided you include this license notice and a URL
//  through which recipients can access the Corresponding Source.
}}}  
Most of the patterns in the pattern files have different licenses specified in the pattern files.

== Stay up to date ==
Subscribe to the RSS on the downloads page to get information about updates of Hyphenator.
It's recommended to replace older versions upon release of a new version.