#summary Version History and note about versioning

= Version History =
== [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/detail?name=Hyphenator%202.2.0.zip 2.2.0] (May 06, 2009) ==
This minor release brings a the following changes:
  * Support for portuguese
  * Functions like hyphenateDocument(), hyphenateElement() and hyphenateWord() are made private. Instead there's a new public function hyphenate().
  * Fixed issue55, issue56, issue60
  * Internal code beautifying (check with jslint)
  * new service `merge+pack.html` bundled with the package: easily create a customized and packed all-in-one script file of Hyphenator.js
  
== [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/detail?name=Hyphenator%202.1.0.zip 2.1.0] (Apr 05, 2009) ==
This minor release brings a the following changes:
  * It's licensed under LGPL version 3.0
  * The DOM isn't cluttered anymore with `lang` and `style` attributes after Hyphenator.js is run
and some bugfixes:
  * fixed issue 53: language is recognized even if it's uppercase

== [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/detail?name=Hyphenator%202.0.0.zip 2.0.0] (Mar 15, 2009) ==
This major release brings a big improvement:
  * pattern files are packed by removing the spaces between patterns. Thus, pattern files are 12% smaller in average. As a downside they are harder to create; therefore I created a helper `compressor.html`
Further there are some new features:
  * support for danish (thanks to Henrik Ryom)
  * you may now define a class for elements that should NOT be hyphenated (`donthyphenateclassname`)
  * hyphenation of AJAX-loaded elements is possible
  * exceptions can be defined for ALL languages
  * Hyphenator.config throws an error, when a key is misspelled or unknown.
and some bugfixes:
  * added `textarea` to the elements that will not be hyphenated
  * fixed a bug that occured when no language has been indicated in the prompt.
  * some internal improvements

== [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/detail?name=Hyphenator_1.0.2.zip 1.0.2] (Mar 08, 2009) ==
Fixed issue 47: Hyphenator.js works in Opera, now.

== [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/detail?name=Hyphenator_1.0.1.zip 1.0.1] (Mar 02, 2009) ==
A pure bugfix release. It fixes three issues:
  * issue 43: Hyphenator.js didn't work when JSON.js was loaded
  * issue 44: zwsp weren't removed, when hyphenation was turned off
  * an issue that broke Hyphenator.js when there was a internal script on the page befor Hyphenator.js

== [http://code.google.com/p/hyphenator/downloads/detail?name=Hyphenator_1.0.0.zip 1.0.0] (Feb 21, 2009) ==
First release after twelve betas.

See [http://www.mnn.ch/hyph/versionhist.html beta version history (german)].

= Version Numbers =
You may want to know, how the version numbers are built.
Each version number consists of three numbers separated by a dot:

`A.B.C`

The first number (`A`) denotes the number of the major release. This number is changed if there's a change in the API or an important new feature.

The second number (`B`) denotes the number of a minor release. The numbering begins fom 0, when the major release has changed. A minor release is caused by a new language or an important bugfix.

The third number (`C`) is the bugfix number. The numbering begins from 0, when the minor release number has changed.